Docs (advanced): add detailed resource reservation page (#3283)
liqotech/liqo: docs/advanced/resource-reservation.md

# Resource reservation

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Liqo enables a cluster, named *consumer*, to acquire resources from another remote cluster, named *provider*.
However, some questions arise, such as *how many resources are desired* (by the consumer), *how resources are reserved* (by the provider), *how can we guarantee that the consumer does not consume more resources than planned*, and more.

This section of the documentation presents a detailed view about how resource reservation is handled with Liqo, and the possible limitations of the current approach.
```

In Liqo, resource sharing always happens through an explicitly negotiated **slice** of the provider cluster: the `ResourceSlice` resource carries the request, the `Quota` resource enforces it on the provider, and the `VirtualNode` resource exposes it on the consumer.

This page describes how that slice is reserved end-to-end, from both the *provider* and the *consumer* point of view: how to configure the default slice size, how to request a specific amount, how strictly the provider enforces it at runtime, and how to suspend or reclaim a reservation that is no longer needed.

```{admonition} Note

> Most users do not need to read this page in full.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The defaults applied by `liqoctl peer` are designed to be sufficient for development and small-scale deployments; the advanced controls below are most useful in multi-tenant environments and when the provider needs to retain a guaranteed share of its capacity for its own workloads.

Reviewer: Rephrase as 
"The defaults applied by `liqoctl peer` (BLA BLA)"
where "BLA BLA" says, very briefly, which are the defaults.

* The **consumer** declares how much it would like to obtain by creating a `ResourceSlice` in its tenant namespace, with the requested quantities in `spec.resources`.
* The **provider** decides how much it actually grants by writing the accepted quantities back into `status.resources` of the same object (the slice is replicated across clusters by the *crd-replicator*).

Once the slice is `Accepted`, two derived resources materialize the reservation:

* On the **provider**, a `Quota` (`offloading.liqo.io/Quota`) is created in the tenant namespace, mirroring the accepted resources and the desired enforcement strictness.
* On the **consumer**, a `VirtualNode` is created with `spec.resourceQuota.hard` set to the same quantities, and the corresponding Kubernetes `Node` advertises that capacity to the local scheduler.

The diagram below summarizes the flow and makes explicit on which cluster each object is created.

```{figure} /_static/images/advanced/resource-reservation/sequence.svg
:align: center
:alt: Sequence diagram of the ResourceSlice to Quota and VirtualNode flow across the consumer and provider clusters.

> Reservation flow. The `ResourceSlice` is created on the **consumer**, then replicated to the **provider** by the *crd-replicator*. On the provider, the class controller fills `status.resources` and `QuotaCreator` materializes the `Quota`. The status is replicated back to the consumer, where `VirtualNodeCreator` produces the `VirtualNode` and the corresponding Kubernetes `Node`.

Reviewer: I would remove this paragraph. It just says again what's written in the text before the picture.

```

From that point on, the reservation has two enforcement points: the **consumer's Kubernetes scheduler**, which sees the `VirtualNode` as a node with finite capacity, and the **provider's `ShadowPod` admission webhook**, which rejects offloaded pods that would push the consumer past its `Quota`.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This double mechanism protects the *provider* cluster from malicious *consumers*, which may bypass the boundary checks implemented in the virtual Liqo node to consume more resources than planned in the remote cluster.

```

> ## Prerequisites outside Liqo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What Liqo does not
```
I would move this entire section at the end of the page.

> The reservation flow relies on a number of preconditions that Liqo itself does not handle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reservation flow relies on a number of preconditions that Liqo itself does not handle, which must be arranged out of band before peering, or alongside it; skipping any of them causes the reservation to fail or to complete with incorrect outcomes.
```

> They must be arranged out of band before peering, or alongside it; skipping any of them causes the reservation to fail or to complete with incorrect outcomes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* **Discover what to ask for.**

>   The consumer must learn from the provider out of band which amounts and resource types are actually available before creating a `ResourceSlice`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The consumer must learn from the provider (out of band) which amounts and resource types are actually available before creating a `ResourceSlice`.
```

>   Liqo has no inventory advertisement and the default class accepts any request, so a misaligned ask is accepted at negotiation time and only manifests later as `Pending` pods on the provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Liqo has no inventory advertisement and the default class accepts any request, so an unproper reservation is accepted at negotiation time and only manifests later with pods that may not able to start (hence, in `pending` state) on the provider cluster.
```

* **Exchange cluster identities and peering credentials.**
  Cluster IDs and a peering kubeconfig (typically generated on the provider with `liqoctl generate peering-user`) must be exchanged through a secure channel before `liqoctl peer` runs.
  Liqo provides no directory or discovery service across clusters.

* **Make the gateway endpoint reachable.**
  The provider must expose its gateway-server service so the consumer can reach it over UDP — a routable `LoadBalancer`, a `NodePort` whose nodes are reachable from the consumer, or external NAT/port-forwarding.
  Liqo neither allocates IPs nor opens firewalls; without UDP reachability the WireGuard tunnel never establishes and no reservation can be honored.

* **Authorize the peering relationship.**
  Someone with organizational authority must decide that the consumer is allowed to peer at all.
  Liqo's handshake verifies *who* a peer is, not *whether they should be admitted*; there is no built-in approval workflow or admission queue at the organization level.

> * **Choose the provider's reservation posture at install time.**

Reviewer: Why "at install time"? Can it be changed at runtime?
If yes: say that it could be changed after installation time
If not: say explicitly that this cannot be changed after installation.

>   The provider operator must pick concrete values for `offloading.defaultNodeResources` and `controllerManager.config.defaultLimitsEnforcement` before any consumer peers.

Reviewer: Where are these values? In the helm chart? Please specify.

  The chart ships defaults suited to demos (4 CPU, 8Gi, `None` enforcement); using them unchanged in production typically grants more than the operator intends and enforces nothing at runtime.

* **Agree on what each resource key physically represents.**
  Liqo treats resource keys (`cpu`, `memory`, `nvidia.com/gpu`, ...) as opaque strings; what `nvidia.com/gpu=2` actually means — A100s versus H100s, full cards versus MIG slices, with or without NVLink — must be agreed out of band.

>   A mismatch is accepted at negotiation and only surfaces as wrong performance or runtime failure once workloads are scheduled.

Reviewer: What do you intend for "mismatch"? Can you provide an example?

* **Ensure offloaded pods comply with the enforcement mode.**

>   When `defaultLimitsEnforcement` is `Soft` or `Hard`, the consumer's pods must declare `requests` (Soft) or matching `requests` and `limits` (Hard) before being offloaded.

Reviewer: There's this page which documents what Hard and Soft means:
https://docs.liqo.io/en/stable/advanced/peering/offloading-in-depth.html#resource-enforcement

I would consider to make a cross-reference to that page, and decide whether to move some content from there to here (and maybe add a reference from there to this page).

  The `ShadowPod` admission webhook rejects non-compliant pods at the provider, leaving the local pod in `Pending`; making pod specs compliant is the consumer application teams' responsibility, not Liqo's.

> * **Provision the capacity the provider advertises.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Provision the capacity advertised by the provider.**
```

  The provider must actually have the physical or cloud capacity to honor what `offloading.defaultNodeResources` and granted `ResourceSlice` objects promise.

>   The default class controller does not verify against real capacity, so over-promising surfaces only at runtime as `Pending` pods; cluster sizing — whether manual, via `cluster-autoscaler` or Karpenter, or through cloud quota requests — is the provider operator's job.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The default class controller does not verify against real capacity, so over-promising surfaces only at runtime with pods resulting in a `Pending` state; cluster sizing — whether manual, via `cluster-autoscaler` or Karpenter, or through cloud quota requests — is the provider operator's job.
```

(ResourceReservationDefaultSlice)=

## Configure the default slice on the provider

> When a consumer requests a slice without specifying particular amounts, the provider fills the missing fields with **installation-time defaults**.

Reviewer: with **installation-time defaults**... of the **provider** or **consumer** cluster?

These defaults are configured through the Helm value `offloading.defaultNodeResources`:

```{code-block} yaml
:caption: "values.yaml (provider)"
offloading:
  defaultNodeResources:
    cpu: "4"
    memory: "8Gi"
    pods: "110"
    ephemeral-storage: "20Gi"
```

> The values shown above are the built-in defaults shipped by the chart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The values shown above are the built-in defaults shipped by the Helm chart.
```

> They can be tightened or extended at install time:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They can be tightened or extended at install time either by setting the proper values in the Helm chart, or through the corresponding options in the command line:
```

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster provider"
liqoctl install [...ARGS] \
  --set offloading.defaultNodeResources.cpu="2" \
  --set offloading.defaultNodeResources.memory="4Gi"
```

These defaults only apply to resource keys the consumer did not explicitly request.
For example, if a consumer asks for `cpu: "8"` and nothing else, the resulting `Quota` will have `cpu: "8"` from the request and `memory: "8Gi"`, `pods: "110"`, `ephemeral-storage: "20Gi"` from the defaults.

```{admonition} Note
Setting `offloading.defaultNodeResources` to a small value is the simplest way to limit how much capacity an unconfigured peering can claim: a consumer that does not explicitly negotiate larger amounts will only ever receive the defaults.
```

## Request a specific slice from the consumer

A consumer that needs a different amount has three options to override the defaults:

### At peering time

> The `liqoctl peer` command accepts the resource flags directly and creates a `ResourceSlice` with the requested quantities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `liqoctl peer` command accepts the resource flags directly from the command line and creates a `ResourceSlice` with the requested quantities:
```

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster consumer"
liqoctl peer \
  --kubeconfig=$CONSUMER_KUBECONFIG_PATH \
  --remote-kubeconfig=$PROVIDER_KUBECONFIG_PATH \
  --cpu=8 \
  --memory=16Gi \
  --pods=200 \
  --resource=nvidia.com/gpu=2
```

> Any resource key supported by the Kubernetes `ResourceList` can be requested through `--resource`, including extended resources advertised by the provider (e.g. `nvidia.com/gpu`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any resource key supported by the Kubernetes `ResourceList` can be requested through the `--resource` command line parameter, including extended resources advertised by the provider (e.g. `nvidia.com/gpu`).
```

### After peering, with a separate `ResourceSlice`

When the peering already exists, additional capacity can be requested by creating a new `ResourceSlice`.
This is also the right path when the resource keys do not fit on the `liqoctl peer` flags:

`````{tab-set}

````{tab-item} liqoctl

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster consumer"
liqoctl create resourceslice gpu-pool \
  --remote-cluster-id cool-firefly \
  --cpu 4 --memory 8Gi --pods 30 \
  --resource nvidia.com/gpu=2
```
````

````{tab-item} YAML

```{code-block} yaml
:caption: "Cluster consumer"
apiVersion: authentication.liqo.io/v1beta1
kind: ResourceSlice
metadata:
  name: gpu-pool
  namespace: liqo-tenant-cool-firefly
  labels:
    liqo.io/remote-cluster-id: cool-firefly
    liqo.io/replication: "true"
spec:
  class: default
  providerClusterID: cool-firefly
  resources:
    cpu: "4"
    memory: 8Gi
    pods: "30"
    nvidia.com/gpu: "2"
```
````

`````

> Each `ResourceSlice` is associated with one `VirtualNode` on the consumer, and one `Quota` on the provider; multiple slices toward the same provider produce multiple virtual nodes, which can be useful to expose heterogeneous resources (for example, separate ARM and x86 pools — see the [multiple virtual nodes](/advanced/peering/offloading-in-depth.md#multiple-virtualnodes) section).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each `ResourceSlice` is associated with one `VirtualNode` on the consumer, and one `Quota` on the provider; multiple slices toward the same provider originate multiple virtual nodes, which can be also useful to expose heterogeneous resources (for example, separate ARM and x86 pools — see the [multiple virtual nodes](/advanced/peering/offloading-in-depth.md#multiple-virtualnodes) section).
```

### By editing an existing `ResourceSlice`

The amount of resources granted by an existing slice can be increased or decreased by updating its `spec.resources`.

> The provider re-evaluates the request, the `Quota` is updated to match `status.resources`, and the `VirtualNode` reflects the new capacity.

Reviewer: What happens if the new request is rejected by the provider cluster?

```

## Inspect the reservation

The state of a reservation can be observed at three points.

On the **consumer**, the `ResourceSlice` shows what was requested and whether it was accepted:

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster consumer"
kubectl get resourceslices.authentication.liqo.io -A
```

```text
NAMESPACE                  NAME       AUTHENTICATION   RESOURCES   AGE
liqo-tenant-cool-firefly   gpu-pool   Accepted         Accepted    21s
```

On the **provider**, the `Quota` shows what is being enforced:

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster provider"
kubectl get quotas.offloading.liqo.io -A
```

```text
NAMESPACE                   NAME                    ENFORCEMENT   CORDONED   AGE
liqo-tenant-wispy-firefly   gpu-pool-c34af51dd912   None                     35s
```

On the **consumer**, the resulting `VirtualNode` exposes the granted capacity to the local scheduler as a regular node, and `liqoctl info peer` shows the same information together with the rest of the peering status:

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster consumer"
liqoctl info peer cool-firefly --get authentication.resourceslices

> ```

Reviewer: On the previous line we have the command, but I'm missing the output of this command.

## Limit how the consumer uses the slice

A `Quota` defines an upper bound, but whether the consumer can ever exceed it at runtime depends on two further options on the provider, both under `controllerManager.config`:

* `enableResourceEnforcement` (default `true`): turns on the `ShadowPod` validating webhook that rejects new offloaded pods if they would push the consumer past its `Quota`.
* `defaultLimitsEnforcement` (default `None`): controls how strictly the webhook interprets the `requests` and `limits` of each pod when computing usage.

> The three modes of `defaultLimitsEnforcement` differ in what they require of the offloaded pod spec:

Reviewer: This looks a duplicate of page https://docs.liqo.io/en/stable/advanced/peering/offloading-in-depth.html#resource-enforcement
Any suggestion to make it better?

* **`Hard`** — offloaded pods must declare both `requests` and `limits`, with `limits == requests`.
  This is the strictest mode and the only one that turns the per-peering quota into a runtime guarantee, since the kubelet on the provider will throttle or kill containers that try to exceed their declared `limits`.

The mode is set at install time and is propagated to every `Quota` created on the provider via the `Quota.spec.limitsEnforcement` field:

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster provider"
liqoctl install [...ARGS] \
  --set controllerManager.config.defaultLimitsEnforcement=Hard
```

```{warning}
Switching to `Hard` enforcement after workloads are already being offloaded will cause new `ShadowPod` admissions to fail for any pod that does not declare matching `requests` and `limits`.
Verify that the workloads being offloaded already comply, or set sensible defaults via a mutating policy, before applying this change to a production provider.
```

## Custom resource allocation policies

The default class controller, shipped with Liqo, accepts every incoming request and only fills in the missing keys with `offloading.defaultNodeResources`.

> This is intentional: it favors usability for the common case and supports environments with cluster autoscalers that grow the cluster on demand, but it does **not** check whether the sum of all granted slices fits within the cluster's real capacity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is intentional: it favors usability for the common case and supports environments with cluster autoscalers that grow the cluster on demand, but it does **not** check whether the sum of all granted slices fits within the cluster's real capacity, neither it enforces specific policies to requesters (e.g., avoiding clients to ask for excessive amount of resources).
```

Providers that need stricter or cluster-wide policies — for example, *"the sum of all accepted slices must not exceed 80% of cluster capacity"*, or *"each tenant may receive at most 20 CPU in total"* — can implement a **custom `ResourceSlice` class controller**.

> A custom class is selected on the consumer side by setting `spec.class` (or `--class` with `liqoctl create resourceslice`):

Reviewer: Where do we have to set this 'spec.class'?

```{code-block} yaml
:caption: "Cluster consumer"
apiVersion: authentication.liqo.io/v1beta1
kind: ResourceSlice
metadata:
  name: gpu-pool
  namespace: liqo-tenant-cool-firefly
spec:
  class: capped
  providerClusterID: cool-firefly
  resources:
    cpu: "8"
```

When the slice is replicated to the provider, the built-in controller leaves the status untouched and waits for the matching custom controller to act.

> The custom controller can deny the request, fully accept it, or partially accept it by writing back a smaller `status.resources`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The custom controller can either deny the request, fully accept it, or partially accept it by writing back a smaller `status.resources`.
```

Both operations can be applied at the granularity of a single `ResourceSlice` or of an entire `Tenant` (which covers all slices of that consumer).

### Cordon a `ResourceSlice`

Cordoning a slice prevents the provider from accepting new resource requests on that slice while leaving existing offloaded workloads running:

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster provider"
liqoctl cordon resourceslice gpu-pool --remote-cluster-id cool-firefly
```

Internally, this adds the `liqo.io/cordoned-resource` annotation to the slice, which causes the `Quota` to be marked `cordoned: true`.
The `ShadowPod` admission webhook then rejects any new offloaded pod from that consumer.
The reverse operation is `liqoctl uncordon resourceslice`.

### Cordon a `Tenant`

Cordoning a tenant has the same effect as cordoning all of its slices, plus it stops the provider from accepting **new** `ResourceSlice` objects from that consumer:

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster provider"
liqoctl cordon tenant cool-firefly
```

> This sets `Tenant.spec.tenantCondition` to `Cordoned`.

Reviewer: where is this Tenant.spec.tenantCondition? (maybe just writing its full name could be enough)

The `RemoteResourceSliceReconciler` honors the condition by leaving previously-accepted slices untouched and denying new ones.

### Drain a `Tenant`

> Draining is the stronger operation: it suspends new allocations *and* invalidates existing ones, so that the provider stops admitting offloaded pods for that consumer altogether:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Draining is the strongest operation: it suspends new allocations *and* invalidates existing ones, so that the provider stops admitting offloaded pods for that consumer altogether:
```

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster provider"
liqoctl drain tenant cool-firefly
```

This sets `Tenant.spec.tenantCondition` to `Drained`; the `RemoteResourceSliceReconciler` then denies the resources of all existing slices.
The reverse operation is `liqoctl uncordon tenant`, which restores the tenant to `Active`.

The full reference for these commands is available on the [`liqoctl cordon`](/usage/liqoctl/liqoctl_cordon.md), [`liqoctl drain`](/usage/liqoctl/liqoctl_drain.md), and [`liqoctl uncordon`](/usage/liqoctl/liqoctl_uncordon.md) pages.

```{important}
Cordon and drain are administrative operations on the **provider**: they affect what the provider is willing to grant.

> Cordoning a tenant on the provider does not unpeer the consumer or remove its `VirtualNode` — pods scheduled on the virtual node may still appear `Running` until they are evicted or the slice is fully released.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cordoning a tenant on the provider does not unpeer the consumer or remove its `VirtualNode`.
In other words, pods scheduled on the virtual node may still appear `Running` until they are evicted or the slice is fully released.
```

```

## Defense-in-depth: Kubernetes `ResourceQuota`

> The mechanisms above are sufficient for most deployments, but a provider that wants an additional safety net independent of the Liqo control plane can apply a standard Kubernetes `ResourceQuota` to the per-tenant namespace:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The mechanisms above are sufficient for most deployments, but a provider that looks for an additional safety net independent of the Liqo control plane can apply a standard Kubernetes `ResourceQuota` to the per-tenant namespace:
```

```{code-block} yaml
:caption: "Cluster provider"
apiVersion: v1
kind: ResourceQuota
metadata:
  name: tenant-cap
  namespace: liqo-tenant-cool-firefly
spec:
  hard:
    requests.cpu: "20"
    requests.memory: "40Gi"
```

Because every offloaded pod from this consumer lands in the tenant namespace, this quota bounds the consumer's footprint regardless of what was negotiated through Liqo.
It is a useful complement to `defaultLimitsEnforcement=Hard` for clusters subject to external compliance requirements.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```{note}
Kubernetes, by default, does not provide strong isolation among tenants.
The operator of the provider cluster should keep in mind this limitation of Kubernetes when he would like to enforce strict resource isolation among different tenants within its cluster.
```
```

## Limitations

A few aspects of the current design are worth keeping in mind when designing a reservation policy:

* The default `ResourceSlice` class controller does not perform a **cluster-wide capacity check**: it accepts every request and may therefore grant more resources than the provider physically has, leaving the final arbitration to the standard Kubernetes scheduler on the provider. Cross-peering reservation requires a custom class controller.

> * The `ShadowPod` admission webhook validates each consumer **against its own `Quota` only**; it does not detect cross-peering overcommit.

Reviewer: I do not understand what this sentence means. What is "cross-peering overcommit"?

# Resource reservation

Liqo enables a cluster, named *consumer*, to acquire resources from another remote cluster, named *provider*.
However, some questions arise, such as *how many resources are desired* (by the consumer), *how resources are reserved* (by the provider), *how can we guarantee that the consumer does not consume more resources than planned*, and more.

This section of the documentation presents a detailed view about how resource reservation is handled with Liqo, and the possible limitations of the current approach.

> In Liqo, resource sharing always happens through an explicitly negotiated **slice** of the provider cluster: the `ResourceSlice` resource carries the request, the `Quota` resource enforces it on the provider, and the `VirtualNode` resource exposes it on the consumer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In Liqo, resource sharing always happens through an explicitly negotiated **slice** of the provider cluster: the `ResourceSlice` resource carries the request, the `Quota` resource enforces it on the provider, and the `VirtualNode` resource exposes it on the consumer.
```

Author: There are no differences in here

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: There is nothing here as well

> This page describes how that slice is reserved end-to-end, from both the *provider* and the *consumer* point of view: how to configure the default slice size, how to request a specific amount, how strictly the provider enforces it at runtime, and how to suspend or reclaim a reservation that is no longer needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we describe how that slice is reserved end-to-end, from both the *provider* and the *consumer* point of view: how to configure the default slice size, how to request a specific amount, how strictly the provider enforces it at runtime, and how to suspend or reclaim a reservation that is no longer needed.
```

Author: Thanks!
I'd lean toward keeping it for consistency with sibling pages (offloading-in-depth.md, usage/peer.md both use the same impersonal "This document/section describes…" pattern). Happy to standardize on the conversational voice page-wide if you'd prefer.

```{admonition} Note

> The defaults applied by `liqoctl peer` (4 CPU, 8Gi memory, 110 pods, and 20Gi ephemeral-storage per slice) are designed to be sufficient for development and small-scale deployments; the advanced controls below are most useful in multi-tenant environments and when the provider needs to retain a guaranteed share of its capacity for its own workloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The defaults applied by `liqoctl peer` (4 CPU, 8Gi memory, 110 pods, and 20Gi ephemeral-storage per slice) are designed to be sufficient for development and small-scale deployments; the advanced controls below are most useful in multi-tenant environments (i.e., when the provider cluster is shared among different consumers) and when the provider needs to retain a guaranteed share of its capacity for its own workloads.
```

* On the **provider**, a `Quota` (`offloading.liqo.io/Quota`) is created in the tenant namespace, mirroring the accepted resources and the desired enforcement strictness.
* On the **consumer**, a `VirtualNode` is created with `spec.resourceQuota.hard` set to the same quantities, and the corresponding Kubernetes `Node` advertises that capacity to the local scheduler.

The diagram below summarizes the flow and makes explicit on which cluster each object is created.

```{figure} /_static/images/advanced/resource-reservation/sequence.svg
:align: center
:alt: Sequence diagram of the ResourceSlice to Quota and VirtualNode flow across the consumer and provider clusters.
```

From that point on, the reservation has two enforcement points: the **consumer's Kubernetes scheduler**, which sees the `VirtualNode` as a node with finite capacity, and the **provider's `ShadowPod` admission webhook**, which rejects offloaded pods that would push the consumer past its `Quota`.
This double mechanism protects the *provider* cluster from malicious *consumers*, which may bypass the boundary checks implemented in the virtual Liqo node to consume more resources than planned in the remote cluster.

> ## What Liqo does not

Reviewer: I would move this section at the end.
(btw, if I'm not wrong, I already said this earlier. But this was not done (no problem), but in this case I expected a comment explaining why it was not done).

Author: I couldn't find this comment earlier in the PR thread — moved it now to the end of the page.

> This double mechanism protects the *provider* cluster from malicious *consumers*, which may bypass the boundary checks implemented in the virtual Liqo node to consume more resources than planned in the remote cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This double mechanism protects the *provider* cluster from malicious *consumers*, which may bypass the boundary checks implemented in the virtual Liqo node to consume, in the provider, more resources than what was negotiated.
```

The reservation flow relies on a number of preconditions that Liqo itself does not handle, which must be arranged out of band before peering, or alongside it; skipping any of them causes the reservation to fail or to complete with incorrect outcomes.

* **Discover what to ask for.**
  The consumer must learn from the provider (out of band) which amounts and resource types are actually available before creating a `ResourceSlice`.

>   Liqo has no inventory advertisement and the default class accepts any request, so an improper reservation is accepted at negotiation time and only manifests later with pods that may not be able to start (hence, in `Pending` state) on the provider cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Liqo has no inventory advertisement and the default class (on the provider side) accepts any request, so an improper reservation is automatically accepted by Liqo, and only manifests later with pods that may not be able to start (hence, in `Pending` state) on the provider cluster.
```

```{admonition} Note
Setting `offloading.defaultNodeResources` to a small value is the simplest way to limit how much capacity an unconfigured peering can claim: a consumer that does not explicitly negotiate larger amounts will always receive the defaults.
```

## Request a specific slice from the consumer

A consumer that needs a different amount has the following three options to override the defaults.

### At peering time

The `liqoctl peer` command accepts the resource flags directly from the command line and creates a `ResourceSlice` with the requested quantities:

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster consumer"
liqoctl peer \
  --kubeconfig=$CONSUMER_KUBECONFIG_PATH \
  --remote-kubeconfig=$PROVIDER_KUBECONFIG_PATH \
  --cpu=8 \
  --memory=16Gi \
  --pods=200 \
  --resource=nvidia.com/gpu=2
```

Any resource key supported by the Kubernetes `ResourceList` can be requested through the `--resource` command line parameter, including extended resources advertised by the provider (e.g. `nvidia.com/gpu`).

### After peering, with a separate `ResourceSlice`

When the peering already exists, additional capacity can be requested by creating a new `ResourceSlice`.

> This is also the right path when the resource keys do not fit on the `liqoctl peer` flags:

Reviewer: I do not understand what this sentence means. Can you provide an example?

>   The `ShadowPod` admission webhook rejects non-compliant pods at the provider, leaving the local pod in `Pending`; making pod specs compliant is the consumer application teams' responsibility, not Liqo's.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The `ShadowPod` admission webhook rejects non-compliant pods at the provider, leaving the local pod in `Pending` state; making pod specs compliant is the consumer application teams' responsibility, not Liqo's.
```

`````{tab-set}

````{tab-item} liqoctl

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster consumer"
liqoctl create resourceslice gpu-pool \
  --remote-cluster-id cool-firefly \
  --cpu 4 --memory 8Gi --pods 30 \
  --resource nvidia.com/gpu=2
```
````

````{tab-item} YAML

```{code-block} yaml
:caption: "Cluster consumer"
apiVersion: authentication.liqo.io/v1beta1
kind: ResourceSlice
metadata:
  name: gpu-pool
  namespace: liqo-tenant-cool-firefly
  labels:
    liqo.io/remote-cluster-id: cool-firefly
    liqo.io/replication: "true"
spec:
  class: default
  providerClusterID: cool-firefly
  resources:
    cpu: "4"
    memory: 8Gi
    pods: "30"
    nvidia.com/gpu: "2"
```
````

`````

Each `ResourceSlice` is associated with one `VirtualNode` on the consumer, and one `Quota` on the provider; multiple slices toward the same provider originate multiple virtual nodes, which can be also useful to expose heterogeneous resources (for example, separate ARM and x86 pools — see the [multiple virtual nodes](/advanced/peering/offloading-in-depth.md#multiple-virtualnodes) section).

> ### By editing an existing `ResourceSlice`

Reviewer: I would move this method as the second option (now is listed as third).

> Setting `offloading.defaultNodeResources` to a small value is the simplest way to limit how much capacity an unconfigured peering can claim: a consumer that does not explicitly negotiate larger amounts will only ever receive the defaults.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting `offloading.defaultNodeResources` to a small value is the simplest way to limit how much capacity an unconfigured peering can claim: a consumer that does not explicitly negotiate larger amounts will always receive the defaults.
```

> A consumer that needs a different amount has three options to override the defaults:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A consumer that needs a different amount has the following three options to override the defaults.
```

The selected mode is propagated to every `Quota` created on the provider via the `Quota.spec.limitsEnforcement` field, and can be updated later via a Helm upgrade (as noted [above](#choose-the-providers-reservation-posture)).

```{warning}
Switching to `Hard` enforcement after workloads are already being offloaded will cause new `ShadowPod` admissions to fail for any pod that does not declare matching `requests` and `limits`.
Verify that the workloads being offloaded already comply, or set sensible defaults via a mutating policy, before applying this change to a production provider.
```

## Custom resource allocation policies

The default class controller, shipped with Liqo, accepts every incoming request and only fills in the missing keys with `offloading.defaultNodeResources`.
This is intentional: it favors usability for the common case and supports environments with cluster autoscalers that grow the cluster on demand, but it does **not** check whether the sum of all granted slices fits within the cluster's real capacity, nor does it limit how much each requester may ask for (for example, preventing clients from asking for excessive amounts of resources).

> Providers that need stricter or cluster-wide policies — for example, *"the sum of all accepted slices must not exceed 80% of cluster capacity"*, or *"each tenant may receive at most 20 CPU in total"* — can implement a **custom `ResourceSlice` class controller**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Providers that need stricter or cluster-wide policies — for example, *"the sum of all accepted slices must not exceed 80% of cluster capacity"*, or *"each tenant may receive at most 20 CPU in total"* — can implement a **custom `ResourceSlice` class controller**.
A reusable starting point — including the controller scaffolding, RBAC, and the wiring needed to react to `ResourceSlice` events — is provided by the [resource-slice-class-controller-template](https://github.com/liqotech/resource-slice-class-controller-template) repository.
```

> A custom class is selected on the consumer side by setting the `spec.class` field of the `ResourceSlice` (or `--class` with `liqoctl create resourceslice`):

Reviewer: Are you sure about this?
It looks a critical issue to me. The consumer selects "none" as class, the provider does not enforce any control, and the consumer can bypass the controls on the provider.
Am I wrong?

Author: You're right — spec.class is consumer-chosen and the default controller is always running, so a strict custom controller alone is bypassable (just pick class: default).
Adding a {warning} spelling this out plus the mitigations (admission webhook to restrict the class, ResourceQuota as runtime cap), and tightening the related "Limitations" sentence accordingly.

```{code-block} yaml
:caption: "Cluster consumer"
apiVersion: authentication.liqo.io/v1beta1
kind: ResourceSlice
metadata:
  name: gpu-pool
  namespace: liqo-tenant-cool-firefly
spec:
  class: capped
  providerClusterID: cool-firefly
  resources:
    cpu: "8"
```

When the slice is replicated to the provider, the built-in controller leaves the status untouched and waits for the matching custom controller to act.
The custom controller can either deny the request, fully accept it, or partially accept it by writing back a smaller `status.resources`.
The `Quota` and `VirtualNode` are then derived from those values, so the partial acceptance is applied transparently throughout the system.

> A reusable starting point — including the controller scaffolding, RBAC, and the wiring needed to react to `ResourceSlice` events — is provided by the [resource-slice-class-controller-template](https://github.com/liqotech/resource-slice-class-controller-template) repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

liqoctl cordon tenant cool-firefly
```

This sets `spec.tenantCondition` to `Cordoned` on the provider's `Tenant` (`authentication.liqo.io/Tenant`) for that consumer.
The `RemoteResourceSliceReconciler` honors the condition by leaving previously-accepted slices untouched and denying new ones.

### Drain a `Tenant`

Draining is the strongest operation: it suspends new allocations *and* invalidates existing ones, so that the provider stops admitting offloaded pods for that consumer altogether:

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster provider"
liqoctl drain tenant cool-firefly
```

This sets `spec.tenantCondition` to `Drained` on the same `Tenant`; the `RemoteResourceSliceReconciler` then denies the resources of all existing slices.
The reverse operation is `liqoctl uncordon tenant`, which restores the tenant to `Active`.

The full reference for these commands is available on the [`liqoctl cordon`](/usage/liqoctl/liqoctl_cordon.md), [`liqoctl drain`](/usage/liqoctl/liqoctl_drain.md), and [`liqoctl uncordon`](/usage/liqoctl/liqoctl_uncordon.md) pages.

```{important}
Cordon and drain are administrative operations on the **provider**: they affect what the provider is willing to grant.

> Cordoning a tenant on the provider does not unpeer the consumer or remove its `VirtualNode`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cordoning a tenant on the provider does not unpeer the consumer nor remove its `VirtualNode`.
```

In other words, pods scheduled on the virtual node may still appear `Running` until they are evicted or the slice is fully released.
```

## Defense-in-depth: Kubernetes `ResourceQuota`

The mechanisms above are sufficient for most deployments, but a provider that looks for an additional safety net independent of the Liqo control plane can apply a standard Kubernetes `ResourceQuota` to the per-tenant namespace:

```{code-block} yaml
:caption: "Cluster provider"
apiVersion: v1
kind: ResourceQuota
metadata:
  name: tenant-cap
  namespace: liqo-tenant-cool-firefly
spec:
  hard:
    requests.cpu: "20"
    requests.memory: "40Gi"
```

> Because every offloaded pod from this consumer lands in the tenant namespace, this quota bounds the consumer's footprint regardless of what was negotiated through Liqo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because every offloaded pod from this consumer lands in the tenant namespace, this quota bounds the consumer's footprint regardless of what was negotiated with Liqo.
```

It is a useful complement to `defaultLimitsEnforcement=Hard` for clusters subject to external compliance requirements.

```{note}
Kubernetes, by default, does not provide strong isolation among tenants.

> The operator of the provider cluster should keep in mind this limitation of Kubernetes when enforcing strict resource isolation among different tenants within its cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The operator of the provider cluster should keep in mind this limitation of Kubernetes when enabling strong resource reservation mechanisms within its cluster.
```

> # Resource reservation

Reviewer 2: This document is not only about reservation, but also about how to the provider cluster shares the resources with the consumer. So maybe we can change the title with something like:
```suggestion
# Resources sharing and reservation
```

However, some questions arise, such as *how many resources are desired* (by the consumer), *how resources are reserved* (by the provider), *how can we guarantee that the consumer does not consume more resources than planned*, and more.

This section of the documentation presents a detailed view about how resource reservation is handled with Liqo, and the possible limitations of the current approach.
Particularly, it describes how that slice is reserved end-to-end, from both the *provider* and the *consumer* point of view: how to configure the default slice size, how to request a specific amount, how strictly the provider enforces it at runtime, and how to suspend or reclaim a reservation that is no longer needed.

```{admonition} Note
The defaults applied by `liqoctl peer` (4 CPU, 8Gi memory, 110 pods, and 20Gi ephemeral-storage per slice) are designed to be sufficient for development and small-scale deployments; the advanced controls below are most useful in multi-tenant environments (i.e., when the provider cluster is shared among different consumers) and when the provider needs to retain a guaranteed share of its capacity for its own workloads.

> ```

Reviewer 2: I think this not is not useful here. We will largely talk about it in the following sections:
```suggestion
```

* The **consumer** declares how much it would like to obtain by creating a `ResourceSlice` in its tenant namespace, with the requested quantities in `spec.resources`.
* The **provider** decides how much it actually grants by writing the accepted quantities back into `status.resources` of the same object (the slice is replicated across clusters by the *crd-replicator*).

Once the slice is `Accepted`, two derived resources materialize the reservation:

* On the **provider**, a `Quota` (`offloading.liqo.io/Quota`) is created in the tenant namespace, mirroring the accepted resources and the desired enforcement strictness.
* On the **consumer**, a `VirtualNode` is created with `spec.resourceQuota.hard` set to the same quantities, and the corresponding Kubernetes `Node` advertises that capacity to the local scheduler.

The diagram below summarizes the flow and makes explicit on which cluster each object is created.

```{figure} /_static/images/advanced/resource-reservation/sequence.svg
:align: center
:alt: Sequence diagram of the ResourceSlice to Quota and VirtualNode flow across the consumer and provider clusters.
```

> From that point on, the reservation has two enforcement points: the **consumer's Kubernetes scheduler**, which sees the `VirtualNode` as a node with finite capacity, and the **provider's `ShadowPod` admission webhook**, which rejects offloaded pods that would push the consumer past its `Quota`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From that point on, the reservation has two enforcement points: 
- the **consumer's Kubernetes scheduler**, which sees the liqo virtual `Node` as a node with finite capacity;
- the **provider's `ShadowPod` admission webhook**, which rejects offloaded pods that would push the consumer past its `Quota`.
```

> This double mechanism protects the *provider* cluster from malicious *consumers*, which may bypass the boundary checks implemented in the virtual Liqo node to consume, in the provider, more resources than what was negotiated.

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't talk about malicious consumers here, better just saying:
```suggestion
This double mechanism prevents *consumers* from using more resources than what was negotiated with the provider cluster.
```

(ResourceReservationDefaultSlice)=

## Configure the default slice on the provider

When a consumer requests a slice without specifying particular amounts, the provider fills the missing fields with **its own installation-time defaults**.
These defaults are configured through the Helm value `offloading.defaultNodeResources`:

```{code-block} yaml
:caption: "values.yaml (provider)"
offloading:
  defaultNodeResources:
    cpu: "4"
    memory: "8Gi"
    pods: "110"
    ephemeral-storage: "20Gi"

> ```

Reviewer 2: I suggest replacing this section with the one from [here](https://github.com/liqotech/liqo/blob/master/docs/usage/peer.md?plain=1#L245). We can move that section into this page and expand it with the additional information you’ve provided here, such as:

- How to customize the default settings during installation
- The clarification that defaults are only applied to unspecified resources

The values shown above are the built-in defaults shipped by the Helm chart.

> They can be tightened or extended at install time, or later via a Helm upgrade — either by setting the proper values in the Helm chart, or through the corresponding options on the `liqoctl install` / `helm upgrade` command line:

Reviewer 2: I'm not fully convinced by this paragraph, a reader might think that the only way to change these parameters after the installation is via `helm upgrade`. But it is always possible to use `liqoctl install`. 
Not going to deep in details, I think we can say something like:
 
```suggestion
The default resources can be customized during installation or later with an upgrade, by setting the  offloading.defaultNodeResources  value. This can be done using either `liqoctl install` or Helm (helm install/helm upgrade). For more details, see the [customization options](https://github.com/copilot/installation/install.md#customization-options) page.
```

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster provider"
liqoctl install [...ARGS] \
  --set offloading.defaultNodeResources.cpu="2" \
  --set offloading.defaultNodeResources.memory="4Gi"
```

These defaults only apply to resource keys the consumer did not explicitly request.
For example, if a consumer asks for `cpu: "8"` and nothing else, the resulting `Quota` will have `cpu: "8"` from the request and `memory: "8Gi"`, `pods: "110"`, `ephemeral-storage: "20Gi"` from the defaults.

```{admonition} Note
Setting `offloading.defaultNodeResources` to a small value is the simplest way to limit how much capacity an unconfigured peering can claim: a consumer that does not explicitly negotiate larger amounts will always receive the defaults.

> ```

Reviewer 2: Let's move this paragraph above the one about how to configure the default parameters

```

### After peering, with a separate `ResourceSlice`

When the peering already exists, additional capacity can be requested by creating a new `ResourceSlice`.
This is also the right path when you want a separate slice and a separate `VirtualNode` for a distinct pool of resources — for example, a dedicated GPU pool kept apart from the main CPU/memory slice — rather than enlarging the original slice:

`````{tab-set}

````{tab-item} liqoctl

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster consumer"
liqoctl create resourceslice gpu-pool \
  --remote-cluster-id cool-firefly \
  --cpu 4 --memory 8Gi --pods 30 \
  --resource nvidia.com/gpu=2
```
````

````{tab-item} YAML

```{code-block} yaml
:caption: "Cluster consumer"
apiVersion: authentication.liqo.io/v1beta1
kind: ResourceSlice
metadata:
  name: gpu-pool
  namespace: liqo-tenant-cool-firefly
  labels:
    liqo.io/remote-cluster-id: cool-firefly
    liqo.io/replication: "true"
spec:
  class: default
  providerClusterID: cool-firefly
  resources:
    cpu: "4"
    memory: 8Gi
    pods: "30"
    nvidia.com/gpu: "2"
```
````

`````

> Each `ResourceSlice` is associated with one `VirtualNode` on the consumer, and one `Quota` on the provider; multiple slices toward the same provider originate multiple virtual nodes, which can be also useful to expose heterogeneous resources (for example, separate ARM and x86 pools — see the [multiple virtual nodes](/advanced/peering/offloading-in-depth.md#multiple-virtualnodes) section).

Reviewer 2: This is not fully true. For each ResourceSlice there is an associated Quota on the provider cluster, but there might be one (by default) or more VirtualNodes associated to a Resource slice. Look at https://docs.liqo.io/en/latest/advanced/peering/offloading-in-depth.html#multiple-virtualnodes

## Inspect the reservation

> The state of a reservation can be observed at three points.

Reviewer 2: I'd first suggest to look at the liqoctl info output, only then the ResourceSlice and the Quota, as it is more a "pro tip", maybe we can have an "Pro tip" info box suggesting to look at the ResourceSlice and the Quota.

On the **consumer**, the `ResourceSlice` shows what was requested and whether it was accepted:

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster consumer"
kubectl get resourceslices.authentication.liqo.io -A
```

```text
NAMESPACE                  NAME       AUTHENTICATION   RESOURCES   AGE
liqo-tenant-cool-firefly   gpu-pool   Accepted         Accepted    21s
```

On the **provider**, the `Quota` shows what is being enforced:

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster provider"
kubectl get quotas.offloading.liqo.io -A
```

```text
NAMESPACE                   NAME                    ENFORCEMENT   CORDONED   AGE
liqo-tenant-wispy-firefly   gpu-pool-c34af51dd912   None                     35s
```

> On the **consumer**, the resulting `VirtualNode` exposes the granted capacity to the local scheduler as a regular node, and `liqoctl info peer` shows the same information together with the rest of the peering status:

Reviewer 2: The `VirtualNode` is the Liqo resource that generates a K8s Node, but what actually exposes the resource is the Node:
```suggestion
On the **consumer**, the resulting Liqo virtual `Node` exposes the granted capacity to the local scheduler as a regular node.

`liqoctl info peer` shows the same information together with the rest of the peering status:
```

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster consumer"
liqoctl info peer cool-firefly --get authentication.resourceslices
```

```text
─ Resource slices ──────────────────────────────────────────────
  ─ gpu-pool ──────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ✔  Resource slice accepted
    Action: Create
    ─ Resources ──────────────────────────────────────────────
      cpu:               4
      memory:            8Gi
      pods:              30
      nvidia.com/gpu:    2
```

> ## Limit how the consumer uses the slice

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Resources quota enforcement 
```

* `defaultLimitsEnforcement` (default `None`): controls how strictly the webhook interprets the `requests` and `limits` of each offloaded pod.
  The three modes — `None`, `Soft`, `Hard` — are defined in detail in the [Resource Enforcement](/advanced/peering/offloading-in-depth.md#resource-enforcement) section of the offloading-in-depth page.

Only `Hard` turns the per-peering quota into a runtime guarantee, since the kubelet on the provider will then throttle or kill containers that try to exceed their declared `limits`.
The selected mode is propagated to every `Quota` created on the provider via the `Quota.spec.limitsEnforcement` field, and can be updated later via a Helm upgrade.

```{warning}
Switching to `Hard` enforcement after workloads are already being offloaded will cause new `ShadowPod` admissions to fail for any pod that does not declare matching `requests` and `limits`.
Verify that the workloads being offloaded already comply, or set sensible defaults via a mutating policy, before applying this change to a production provider.

> ```

Reviewer 2: I'd move the section we have [in this page](https://github.com/liqotech/liqo/blob/master/docs/advanced/peering/offloading-in-depth.md?plain=1#L334) and integrate it here.

In other words, pods scheduled on the virtual node may still appear `Running` until they are evicted or the slice is fully released.
```

## Defense-in-depth: Kubernetes `ResourceQuota`

The mechanisms above are sufficient for most deployments, but a provider that looks for an additional safety net independent of the Liqo control plane can apply a standard Kubernetes `ResourceQuota` to the per-tenant namespace:

```{code-block} yaml
:caption: "Cluster provider"
apiVersion: v1
kind: ResourceQuota
metadata:
  name: tenant-cap
  namespace: liqo-tenant-cool-firefly
spec:
  hard:
    requests.cpu: "20"
    requests.memory: "40Gi"
```

Because every offloaded pod from this consumer lands in the tenant namespace, this quota bounds the consumer's footprint regardless of what was negotiated with Liqo.
It is a useful complement to `defaultLimitsEnforcement=Hard` for clusters subject to external compliance requirements.

```{note}
Kubernetes, by default, does not provide strong isolation among tenants.
The operator of the provider cluster should keep in mind this limitation of Kubernetes when enabling strong resource reservation mechanisms within its cluster.

> ```

Reviewer 2: This cannot work, since it's not true that `every offloaded pod from this consumer lands in the tenant namespace`. Offloaded pods land in the offloaded namespace that mirrors the namespace on the consumer cluster. So, you cannot enforce the resource with a ResourceQuota, since resource usage could be scattered across multiple offloaded namespaces.
 
```suggestion
```

## Limitations

A few aspects of the current design are worth keeping in mind when designing a reservation policy:

* The default `ResourceSlice` class controller does not perform a **cluster-wide capacity check**: it accepts every request and may therefore grant more resources than the provider physically has, leaving the final arbitration to the standard Kubernetes scheduler on the provider. Cross-peering reservation requires a custom class controller **paired with an admission webhook (or equivalent mechanism) that prevents consumers from selecting the lenient default class** — Liqo does not ship that mechanism.

> * The `ShadowPod` admission webhook validates each consumer **against its own `Quota` only**; it does not check whether the sum of resources committed across all consumers exceeds the provider's real capacity.

Reviewer 2: I don't believe this is a limitation of the ShadowPod admission webhook but instaead of the ResourceSlice controller, which accept or reject the ResourceSlices.

> * `defaultLimitsEnforcement` is a cluster-wide setting on the provider. Per-tenant strictness must be implemented with a custom class controller or via Kubernetes-level admission policies on the tenant namespaces.

Reviewer 2: I’m not sure I understand what you mean by this sentence. The defaultLimitsEnforcement option determines whether offloaded pods must have resource requests and limits set, to ensure they don’t exceed the negotiated quota.

* **Discover what to ask for.**
  The consumer must learn from the provider (out of band) which amounts and resource types are actually available before creating a `ResourceSlice`.
  Liqo has no inventory advertisement and the default class (on the provider side) accepts any request, so an improper reservation is automatically accepted by Liqo, and only manifests later with pods that may not be able to start (hence, in `Pending` state) on the provider cluster.

* **Exchange cluster identities and peering credentials.**
  Cluster IDs and a peering kubeconfig (typically generated on the provider with `liqoctl generate peering-user`) must be exchanged through a secure channel before `liqoctl peer` runs.
  Liqo provides no directory or discovery service across clusters.

* **Make the gateway endpoint reachable.**
  The provider must expose its gateway-server service so the consumer can reach it over UDP — a routable `LoadBalancer`, a `NodePort` whose nodes are reachable from the consumer, or external NAT/port-forwarding.

>   Liqo neither allocates IPs nor opens firewalls; without UDP reachability the WireGuard tunnel never establishes and no reservation can be honored.

Reviewer 2: Doesn't it go without saying?

* **Authorize the peering relationship.**
  Someone with organizational authority must decide that the consumer is allowed to peer at all.

>   Liqo's handshake verifies *who* a peer is, not *whether they should be admitted*; there is no built-in approval workflow or admission queue at the organization level.

Reviewer 2: I'd add this can be achieved via a custom ResourceSlice class.
